doc/tutorials/collocations.rst, before:


Collocations Tutorial - Examples
================================

.. Warning::
   This tutorial is still under development and might contain invalid code.

Before we start, we configure this notebook so that it shows our
matplotlib plots directly.

.. code:: ipython3

    %matplotlib inline
    %load_ext autoreload
    %autoreload 2
    
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Collocations between two data arrays
------------------------------------

Let's try out the simplest case: You have two data arrays with
temporal-spatial data and you want to find collocations between them.

Firstly, we create two example data arrays (can be a simple dictionary
of numpy arrays or other dictionary-like objects such as
xarray.Dataset). Let's assume, these data arrays represent measurements
from two different instruments (e.g. on satellites or ships that can
swim over land). Each measurement has a time attribute indicating when
it was taken and a geo-location (latitude and longitude) indicating where
this happened.

.. code:: ipython3

    import cartopy.crs as projections
    from typhon.plots import worldmap
    
    # Create the data
    primary = {
        "time": np.arange("2018-01-01", "2018-01-02", dtype="datetime64[h]"),
        "lat": 30.*np.sin(np.linspace(-3.14, 3.14, 24))+20,
        "lon": np.linspace(0, 90, 24),
    }
    secondary = {
        "time": np.arange("2018-01-01", "2018-01-02", dtype="datetime64[h]"),
        "lat": 30.*np.sin(np.linspace(-3.14, 3.14, 24)+1.)+20,
        "lon": np.linspace(0, 90, 24),
    }
    
    # Plot the data
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
    wmap,_ = worldmap(primary["lat"], primary["lon"], s=24, background=True)
    worldmap(secondary["lat"], secondary["lon"], s=24, ax=wmap,)
    wmap.set_extent([0, 90, -10, 50])



.. image:: _figures/collocations/arrays-worldmap.png


The timestamps for the measurements are exactly shifted by one hour
between *primary* and *secondary*:

Secondly, let's find all measurements of *primary* that have a maxmimum
distance of *300 kilometers* to the measurements of *secondary*:

.. code:: ipython3

    from typhon.spareice import collocate
    
    indices = collocate([primary, secondary], max_distance=500,)
    print(indices)


.. parsed-literal::

    [[ 4 15 15 16]
     [ 4 15 16 15]]


This means, that the 4th point of *primary* collocates with the 4th
point of *secondary* and the 16th point of *primary* collocates with the
15th point of *secondary*

Let's plot the two collocations on a map as red crosses:

.. code:: ipython3

    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
    
    # Plot the collocations
    wmap,_ = worldmap(
        primary["lat"][indices[0]], primary["lon"][indices[0]], 
        c="r", s=128, marker='x', background=True
    )
    worldmap(
        secondary["lat"][indices[1]], secondary["lon"][indices[1]], 
        c="r", s=128, marker='x', ax=wmap,)
    
    # Plot all points:
    worldmap(primary["lat"], primary["lon"], s=24, ax=wmap,)
    worldmap(secondary["lat"], secondary["lon"], s=24, ax=wmap,)
    wmap.set_extent([0, 90, -10, 50])
    fig.savefig("example-collocations.pdf")



.. image:: _figures/collocations/arrays-worldmap-marked.png


We can also add a temporal filter that filters out all points which
difference in time is bigger than a time interval. We are doing this by
using *max\_interval*:

.. code:: ipython3

    indices = collocate([primary, secondary], max_distance=300, max_interval="1 hour")
    print(indices)


.. parsed-literal::

    [[4]
     [4]]


If we are not interested in spatial collocations but only in temporal
ones, we can set a *max\_interval* parameter only:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Find temporal collocations
    indices = collocate([primary, secondary], max_interval="1 hour")
    
    # Plot intervals
    interval = (primary["time"][indices[0]] - secondary["time"][indices[1]]).astype("int")
    plt.scatter(range(indices.shape[1]), interval)
    plt.xlabel("collocation id")
    plt.ylabel("interval [h]")

.. image:: _figures/collocations/intervals.png


Find collocations between two datasets
--------------------------------------

Normally, one has the data stored in a set of many files. typhon
provides an object to handle those *datasets* (see the `typhon
doc <http://radiativetransfer.org/misc/typhon/doc-trunk/generated/typhon.spareice.datasets.Dataset.html>`__).
It is very simple to find collocations between them.

Firstly, we need to create Dataset objects and let them know where to find
their files:

.. code:: ipython3
    
    from typhon.spareice import collocate, collocate_datasets, CollocatedDataset, Dataset
    
    # Create the dataset object and point them to the input files
    a_dataset = Dataset(
        name="SatelliteA",
        path="data/SatelliteA/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )
    b_dataset = Dataset(
        name="SatelliteB",
        path="data/SatelliteB/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )
    
    # Create the output dataset:
    ab_collocations = CollocatedDataset(
        name="ab_collocations",
        path="data/ab_collocations/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )

If you do not know how to deal with those Dataset objects, try this
`tutorial <http://radiativetransfer.org/misc/typhon/doc-trunk/tutorials/dataset.html>`__.

Now, we can search for collocations between *a\_dataset* and
*b\_dataset* and store them to *ab\_collocations*.

.. code:: ipython3

    collocate_datasets(
        [a_dataset, b_dataset], start="2018", end="2018-01-02",
        output=ab_collocations, max_interval="1h", max_distance=300
    )


.. parsed-literal::

    Find collocations between SatelliteA and SatelliteB from 2018-01-01 00:00:00 to 2018-01-02 00:00:00
    Retrieve time coverages from files...


::


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-13-e1ef9a1d68df> in <module>()
          1 collocate_datasets(
          2     [a_dataset, b_dataset], start="2018", end="2018-01-02",
    ----> 3     output=ab_collocations, max_interval="1h", max_distance=300
          4 )


    ~/Projects/typhon/typhon/spareice/collocations/common.py in collocate_datasets(datasets, start, end, output, verbose, **collocate_args)
        701         print("Retrieve time coverages from files...")
        702 
    --> 703     for data, files in DataSlider(start, end, *datasets):
        704 
        705         primary_start, primary_end = data[primary.name].get_range("time")


    ~/Projects/typhon/typhon/spareice/datasets.py in move(self)
       2674 
       2675             data = self._align_to_primary(data, primary_data)
    -> 2676             data[self.datasets[0].name] = primary_data
       2677 
       2678             yield data, files


    TypeError: 'NoneType' object does not support item assignment


.. code:: ipython3

    from typhon.spareice import collocate
    
    a_data = a_dataset.collect("2018", "2018-01-02")
    b_data = b_dataset.collect("2018", "2018-01-02")
    collocate(a_data, b_data, max_interval="1hour", max_distance=300)




.. parsed-literal::

    array([[ 69,  69,  79,  79,  79,  80,  80,  80,  89,  89,  89,  90,  90,
             90],
           [110, 109, 129, 130, 131, 129, 130, 131, 150, 149, 148, 150, 149,
            148]])



Find collocations between more than two datasets
------------------------------------------------

How about finding collocations between more than two datasets? Let's
assume we have an additional dataset from *Satellite C*:

.. code:: ipython3

    from typhon.spareice.handlers import CSV
    
    c_dataset = Dataset(
        name="SatelliteC",
        path="data/SatelliteC/{year}/{doy}/{hour}{minute}{second}.dat.gz",
        # If you do not know, why we have to add these lines, try the tutorial link from above.
        handler=CSV(read_csv={"parse_dates":["time", ]}),
        time_coverage="05:59:59 hours",
    )

Collocating multiple datasets could mean two things: 1. Only find the
subset of collocations that have all collocated datasets in common.
**This is not yet implemented** 2. Find collocations of one dataset that
has been already collocated with a third dataset. This means for our
example, we would use the *a\_dataset* data points from
*ab\_collocations* and collocate them with the *c\_dataset*.

1. Find the subset of all collocations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Point 1 is still not implemented. However, it is planned to do it like
this: Simply pass more datasets objects to the *Collocator.read()*
method.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Create the output dataset:
    abc_collocations = CollocatedDataset(
        path="data/abc_collocations/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )
    
    # WILL NOT WORK, IS NOT YET IMPLEMENTED!
    # collocator.run(start, end, [a_dataset, b_dataset, c_dataset], output=abc_collocations, only_primary=False)

2. Find collocations with an already-collocated dataset
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is easy to achieve. We have already collocated *a\_dataset* with
*b\_dataset*. Now, we can 'add' the collocations from *c\_dataset* with
*ab\_collocations*. We can decide which spatial-temporal information we
want to use as reference from the *a\_dataset* or *b\_dataset* by
setting the parameter ``primary`` of *ab\_collocations*:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Using the Satellite A dataset (a_dataset) as reference:
    ab_collocations.primary = "SatelliteA"
    
    # Create the output dataset:
    ac_collocations = CollocatedDataset(
        path="data/ac_collocations/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )

Now, let's find the collocations:

.. code:: ipython3

    collocator = Collocator(max_interval=100, max_distance=300)
    collocator.run(start, end, [ab_collocations, c_dataset], output=ac_collocations)


::


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    NameError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-13-fd64dea4f16f> in <module>()
          1 collocator = Collocator(max_interval=100, max_distance=300)
    ----> 2 collocator.run(start, end, [ab_collocations, c_dataset], output=ac_collocations)
    

    NameError: name 'start' is not defined

Commit message:

Add warning about development status

doc/tutorials/collocations.rst, after:


Find collocations with typhon
=============================

.. Warning::
   This tutorial is still under development and contains invalid code.

Before we start, we configure this notebook so that it shows our
matplotlib plots directly.

.. code:: ipython3

    %matplotlib inline
    %load_ext autoreload
    %autoreload 2
    
    import numpy as np
    import matplotlib.pyplot as plt

Collocations between two data arrays
------------------------------------

Let's try out the simplest case: You have two data arrays with
temporal-spatial data and you want to find collocations between them.

Firstly, we create two example data arrays (can be a simple dictionary
of numpy arrays or other dictionary-like objects such as
xarray.Dataset). Let's assume, these data arrays represent measurements
from two different instruments (e.g. on satellites or ships that can
swim over land). Each measurement has a time attribute indicating when
it was taken and a geo-location (latitude and longitude) indicating where
this happened.

.. code:: ipython3

    import cartopy.crs as projections
    from typhon.plots import worldmap
    
    # Create the data
    primary = {
        "time": np.arange("2018-01-01", "2018-01-02", dtype="datetime64[h]"),
        "lat": 30.*np.sin(np.linspace(-3.14, 3.14, 24))+20,
        "lon": np.linspace(0, 90, 24),
    }
    secondary = {
        "time": np.arange("2018-01-01", "2018-01-02", dtype="datetime64[h]"),
        "lat": 30.*np.sin(np.linspace(-3.14, 3.14, 24)+1.)+20,
        "lon": np.linspace(0, 90, 24),
    }
    
    # Plot the data
    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
    wmap,_ = worldmap(primary["lat"], primary["lon"], s=24, background=True)
    worldmap(secondary["lat"], secondary["lon"], s=24, ax=wmap,)
    wmap.set_extent([0, 90, -10, 50])



.. image:: _figures/collocations/arrays-worldmap.png


The timestamps for the measurements are exactly shifted by one hour
between *primary* and *secondary*:

Secondly, let's find all measurements of *primary* that have a maxmimum
distance of *300 kilometers* to the measurements of *secondary*:

.. code:: ipython3

    from typhon.spareice import collocate
    
    indices = collocate([primary, secondary], max_distance=500,)
    print(indices)


.. parsed-literal::

    [[ 4 15 15 16]
     [ 4 15 16 15]]


This means, that the 4th point of *primary* collocates with the 4th
point of *secondary* and the 16th point of *primary* collocates with the
15th point of *secondary*

Let's plot the two collocations on a map as red crosses:

.. code:: ipython3

    fig = plt.figure(figsize=(10, 10))
    
    # Plot the collocations
    wmap,_ = worldmap(
        primary["lat"][indices[0]], primary["lon"][indices[0]], 
        c="r", s=128, marker='x', background=True
    )
    worldmap(
        secondary["lat"][indices[1]], secondary["lon"][indices[1]], 
        c="r", s=128, marker='x', ax=wmap,)
    
    # Plot all points:
    worldmap(primary["lat"], primary["lon"], s=24, ax=wmap,)
    worldmap(secondary["lat"], secondary["lon"], s=24, ax=wmap,)
    wmap.set_extent([0, 90, -10, 50])
    fig.savefig("example-collocations.pdf")



.. image:: _figures/collocations/arrays-worldmap-marked.png


We can also add a temporal filter that filters out all points which
difference in time is bigger than a time interval. We are doing this by
using *max\_interval*:

.. code:: ipython3

    indices = collocate([primary, secondary], max_distance=300, max_interval="1 hour")
    print(indices)


.. parsed-literal::

    [[4]
     [4]]


If we are not interested in spatial collocations but only in temporal
ones, we can set a *max\_interval* parameter only:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Find temporal collocations
    indices = collocate([primary, secondary], max_interval="1 hour")
    
    # Plot intervals
    interval = (primary["time"][indices[0]] - secondary["time"][indices[1]]).astype("int")
    plt.scatter(range(indices.shape[1]), interval)
    plt.xlabel("collocation id")
    plt.ylabel("interval [h]")

.. image:: _figures/collocations/intervals.png


Find collocations between two datasets
--------------------------------------

.. Warning::
   This section is not up-to-date and will not work with the newest version of
   typhon. Please wait for an update.

Normally, one has the data stored in a set of many files. typhon
provides an object to handle those *datasets* (see the `typhon
doc <http://radiativetransfer.org/misc/typhon/doc-trunk/generated/typhon.spareice.datasets.Dataset.html>`__).
It is very simple to find collocations between them.

Firstly, we need to create Dataset objects and let them know where to find
their files:

.. code:: ipython3
    
    from typhon.spareice import collocate, collocate_datasets, CollocatedDataset, Dataset
    
    # Create the dataset object and point them to the input files
    a_dataset = Dataset(
        name="SatelliteA",
        path="data/SatelliteA/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )
    b_dataset = Dataset(
        name="SatelliteB",
        path="data/SatelliteB/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )
    
    # Create the output dataset:
    ab_collocations = CollocatedDataset(
        name="ab_collocations",
        path="data/ab_collocations/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )

If you do not know how to deal with those Dataset objects, try this
`tutorial <http://radiativetransfer.org/misc/typhon/doc-trunk/tutorials/dataset.html>`__.

Now, we can search for collocations between *a\_dataset* and
*b\_dataset* and store them to *ab\_collocations*.

.. code:: ipython3

    collocate_datasets(
        [a_dataset, b_dataset], start="2018", end="2018-01-02",
        output=ab_collocations, max_interval="1h", max_distance=300
    )


.. parsed-literal::

    Find collocations between SatelliteA and SatelliteB from 2018-01-01 00:00:00 to 2018-01-02 00:00:00
    Retrieve time coverages from files...


::


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    TypeError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-13-e1ef9a1d68df> in <module>()
          1 collocate_datasets(
          2     [a_dataset, b_dataset], start="2018", end="2018-01-02",
    ----> 3     output=ab_collocations, max_interval="1h", max_distance=300
          4 )


    ~/Projects/typhon/typhon/spareice/collocations/common.py in collocate_datasets(datasets, start, end, output, verbose, **collocate_args)
        701         print("Retrieve time coverages from files...")
        702 
    --> 703     for data, files in DataSlider(start, end, *datasets):
        704 
        705         primary_start, primary_end = data[primary.name].get_range("time")


    ~/Projects/typhon/typhon/spareice/datasets.py in move(self)
       2674 
       2675             data = self._align_to_primary(data, primary_data)
    -> 2676             data[self.datasets[0].name] = primary_data
       2677 
       2678             yield data, files


    TypeError: 'NoneType' object does not support item assignment


.. code:: ipython3

    from typhon.spareice import collocate
    
    a_data = a_dataset.collect("2018", "2018-01-02")
    b_data = b_dataset.collect("2018", "2018-01-02")
    collocate(a_data, b_data, max_interval="1hour", max_distance=300)




.. parsed-literal::

    array([[ 69,  69,  79,  79,  79,  80,  80,  80,  89,  89,  89,  90,  90,
             90],
           [110, 109, 129, 130, 131, 129, 130, 131, 150, 149, 148, 150, 149,
            148]])



Find collocations between more than two datasets
------------------------------------------------

How about finding collocations between more than two datasets? Let's
assume we have an additional dataset from *Satellite C*:

.. code:: ipython3

    from typhon.spareice.handlers import CSV
    
    c_dataset = Dataset(
        name="SatelliteC",
        path="data/SatelliteC/{year}/{doy}/{hour}{minute}{second}.dat.gz",
        # If you do not know, why we have to add these lines, try the tutorial link from above.
        handler=CSV(read_csv={"parse_dates":["time", ]}),
        time_coverage="05:59:59 hours",
    )

Collocating multiple datasets could mean two things: 1. Only find the
subset of collocations that have all collocated datasets in common.
**This is not yet implemented** 2. Find collocations of one dataset that
has been already collocated with a third dataset. This means for our
example, we would use the *a\_dataset* data points from
*ab\_collocations* and collocate them with the *c\_dataset*.

1. Find the subset of all collocations
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Point 1 is still not implemented. However, it is planned to do it like
this: Simply pass more datasets objects to the *Collocator.read()*
method.

.. code:: ipython3

    # Create the output dataset:
    abc_collocations = CollocatedDataset(
        path="data/abc_collocations/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )
    
    # WILL NOT WORK, IS NOT YET IMPLEMENTED!
    # collocator.run(start, end, [a_dataset, b_dataset, c_dataset], output=abc_collocations, only_primary=False)

2. Find collocations with an already-collocated dataset
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

This is easy to achieve. We have already collocated *a\_dataset* with
*b\_dataset*. Now, we can 'add' the collocations from *c\_dataset* with
*ab\_collocations*. We can decide which spatial-temporal information we
want to use as reference from the *a\_dataset* or *b\_dataset* by
setting the parameter ``primary`` of *ab\_collocations*:

.. code:: ipython3

    # Using the Satellite A dataset (a_dataset) as reference:
    ab_collocations.primary = "SatelliteA"
    
    # Create the output dataset:
    ac_collocations = CollocatedDataset(
        path="data/ac_collocations/{year}/{month}/{day}/"
             "{hour}{minute}{second}-{end_hour}{end_minute}{end_second}.nc.gz"
    )

Now, let's find the collocations:

.. code:: ipython3

    collocator = Collocator(max_interval=100, max_distance=300)
    collocator.run(start, end, [ab_collocations, c_dataset], output=ac_collocations)


::


    ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

    NameError                                 Traceback (most recent call last)

    <ipython-input-13-fd64dea4f16f> in <module>()
          1 collocator = Collocator(max_interval=100, max_distance=300)
    ----> 2 collocator.run(start, end, [ab_collocations, c_dataset], output=ac_collocations)
    

    NameError: name 'start' is not defined
